_blog/202512.md, before:

# Thinking Local LLMs and AI

Running models locally is nothing new. Infact I've always had a particular affinity to `llama.cpp`. Recently, there is the newly introduced local text to image (z-image-turbo) generation model that can 'comfortable' be run locally (albeit perhaps a bit slow without a dedicated GPU).

Usage would look something like (using `justfile` to template it) using `stable-diffusion.cpp`:

```sh
[no-cd]
sd_generate:
    PROMPT=$(gum input --placeholder "prompt for image generation"); \
    OUTPUT=$(gum input --placeholder "output png file"); \
    DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=/path/to/dyld/library \
    sd --difffusion-model z_image_turbo-Q4_0.gguf \
    --vae /path/diffusion_pytorch_model.safetensors \
    --llm Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507-Q6_K.gguf \
    --cfg-scale 1.0 \
    --offload-to-cpu \
    --diffusion-fa \
    -H 512 -W 512 --steps 9 \
    -p "$PROMPT" \
    -o "$OUTPUT"
```

On M1 Macbook Pro with offload cpu enabled it will take roughly 2 minutes per a step, whereas not offloading will improve performance at the cost of memory consumption (n.b. you should have `--offload-to-cpu` turned on if you are using a low memory variant).

Similarly, it is possible and perhaps desireable to using `llama.cpp` via CLI. One random project I want to do with Helix is abstracting over it so that we can use it to generate text by automatically looking up context in directory. This will probably be a mini-project (think of it as an extension of [smart-cat](https://github.com/efugier/smartcat))

```sh
$ llama-cli -m /path/to/llm.gguf -n 1 -p "hello how are you" -no-cnv
```

One of the challenging aspects is if the conversation is multi-turn we would need to format the prompt (`-p`) to use the chatml template. Having a way to build this up in an intelligent manner is a discussion for another day (is it possible to do it easily via `gum` with `justfile`? Maybe?). Another alternative is to make use of `aider` with helix with the `fs_watcher_lsp` -- this is probably the more natural way to approach it.

Commit message:

add comment on using universal ctags for injecting context

_blog/202512.md, after:

# Thinking Local LLMs and AI

Running models locally is nothing new. Infact I've always had a particular affinity to `llama.cpp`. Recently, there is the newly introduced local text to image (z-image-turbo) generation model that can 'comfortable' be run locally (albeit perhaps a bit slow without a dedicated GPU).

Usage would look something like (using `justfile` to template it) using `stable-diffusion.cpp`:

```sh
[no-cd]
sd_generate:
    PROMPT=$(gum input --placeholder "prompt for image generation"); \
    OUTPUT=$(gum input --placeholder "output png file"); \
    DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=/path/to/dyld/library \
    sd --difffusion-model z_image_turbo-Q4_0.gguf \
    --vae /path/diffusion_pytorch_model.safetensors \
    --llm Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507-Q6_K.gguf \
    --cfg-scale 1.0 \
    --offload-to-cpu \
    --diffusion-fa \
    -H 512 -W 512 --steps 9 \
    -p "$PROMPT" \
    -o "$OUTPUT"
```

On M1 Macbook Pro with offload cpu enabled it will take roughly 2 minutes per a step, whereas not offloading will improve performance at the cost of memory consumption (n.b. you should have `--offload-to-cpu` turned on if you are using a low memory variant).

Similarly, it is possible and perhaps desireable to using `llama.cpp` via CLI. One random project I want to do with Helix is abstracting over it so that we can use it to generate text by automatically looking up context in directory. This will probably be a mini-project (think of it as an extension of [smart-cat](https://github.com/efugier/smartcat))

```sh
$ llama-cli -m /path/to/llm.gguf -n 1 -p "hello how are you" -no-cnv
```

One of the challenging aspects is if the conversation is multi-turn we would need to format the prompt (`-p`) to use the chatml template. Having a way to build this up in an intelligent manner is a discussion for another day (is it possible to do it easily via `gum` with `justfile`? Maybe?). Another alternative is to make use of `aider` with helix with the `fs_watcher_lsp` -- this is probably the more natural way to approach it. If we were to implement it ourselves, a way to do this is to imitate the approach taken by aider chat by using [Universal Ctags](github.com/universal-ctags/ctags) which builds a map for the whole code repository which uses an LLM to figure out which particular _file_ is of interest and then sends the relevant contents to the LLM.
